DE Methods	DE tool short name	DE tool reference	Assumed Distribution of Counts	Normalization Method	Description	Possible Number of Factors 	Integrated Outlier Adjustmemnt	R Package (Version) and Reference	Package Version	Package Reference
edgeR (exact test)	edgeR exact	"Robinson, M. D., & Smyth, G. K. (2007). Moderated statistical tests for assessing differences in tag abundance. Bioinformatics, 23(21), 2881-2887."	Negative Binomial	TMM	It applies exact test for testing differential expression between two independent groups. The exact test uses negative binomial distribution. It calculates exact p-values by summing over all sums of counts that have a probability less than the probability under the null hypothesis of the observed sum of counts given the conditional distribution for the sum of counts in a group is known. It uses empirical Bayes strategy for squeezing the gene specific dispersions towards a global dispersion trend or towards a common dispersion value. Empirical Bayes tool is introduced to tackle small samples problem by borrowing information across genes.	Single	No	edgeR	3.14.0	"Robinson, MD, McCarthy, DJ, Smyth, GK (2010). edgeR: a Bioconductor package for differential expression analysis of digital gene expression data. Bioinformatics 26, 139–140."
eddeR (Generalized Linear Modelling) 	edgeR GLM	"McCarthy, D. J., Chen, Y., & Smyth, G. K. (2012). Differential expression analysis of multifactor RNA-Seq experiments with respect to biological variation. Nucleic acids research, 40(10), 4288-4297."	Negative Binomial	TMM	"It fits generalized linear model for Negative Binomial family. It uses likelihood-ratio test for testing differential expression. It can be used for complex experiment designs, for example multiple factors. It uses empirical Bayes strategy for squeezing the gene specific dispersions towards a global dispersion trend or towards a common dispersion value. Empirical Bayes tool is introduced to tackle small samples problem by borrowing information across genes."	Multiple	No	edgeR	3.14.1	"Robinson, MD, McCarthy, DJ, Smyth, GK (2010). edgeR: a Bioconductor package for differential expression analysis of digital gene expression data. Bioinformatics 26, 139–140."
edgeR (robust Generalized Linear Modelling) 	edgeR robust	"Zhou, X., Lindsay, H., & Robinson, M. D. (2014). Robustly detecting differential expression in RNA sequencing data using observation weights. Nucleic acids research, 42(11), e91-e91."	Negative Binomial	TMM	It fits generalized linear model (GLM) for Negative Binomial family with weights are assigned to each observation. It first fits the classical GLM model and then calculates residuals (Pearson residuals). It uses the inverse of residuals as weight to their corresponding observations and refit GLM. It is intended to be robust to outlier observations by assigning less weight to outlying observations. Likelihood-ratio test are used for testing differential expression. It uses empirical Bayes strategy for squeezing the gene specific dispersions towards a global dispersion trend or towards a common dispersion value. Empirical Bayes tool is introduced to tackle small samples problem by borrowing information across genes.	Multiple	Yes	edgeR	3.14.2	"Robinson, MD, McCarthy, DJ, Smyth, GK (2010). edgeR: a Bioconductor package for differential expression analysis of digital gene expression data. Bioinformatics 26, 139–140."
edgeR (Quasi Likelihood)	edgeR QL	"Lun, A. T., Chen, Y., & Smyth, G. K. (2016). It’s DE-licious: a recipe for differential expression analyses of RNA-seq experiments using quasi-likelihood methods in edgeR. Statistical Genomics: Methods and Protocols, 391-416."	Negative Binomial	TMM	"It fits generalized linear model (GLM) for Negative Binomial family. In this model, the Negative Binomial dispersion parameter is a global parameter representing the overall biological variability across all genes.  To account any gene-specific variability above and below the overall level, it uses Quasi-likelihood dispersion parameter. For testing differential expression, it uses quasi-likelihood F-test, resulting in more conservative and rigorous type I error rate control. To estimate the Quasi-likelihood dispersion parameter (gene-specific), it uses empirical Bayes strategy. Empirical Bayes tool is introduced to tackle small samples problem by borrowing information across genes."	Multiple	Yes	edgeR	3.14.3	"Robinson, MD, McCarthy, DJ, Smyth, GK (2010). edgeR: a Bioconductor package for differential expression analysis of digital gene expression data. Bioinformatics 26, 139–140."
DESeq	DESeq	"Anders, S., & Huber, W. (2010). Differential expression analysis for sequence count data. Genome biology, 11(10), R106."	Negative Binomial	DESeq	"It uses exact test for testing differential expression using Negative Binomial distribution. For precise estimate of gene-specific dispersion, it fits local or parametric regression model for the observed mean-variance relationship, which is useful (according to the authors) for small sample experiments by pooling the data from genes with similar expression strength for the purpose of variance estimation"	Single	No	DESeq	1.24.0	Simon Anders and Wolfgang Huber (2010): Differential expression analysis for sequence count data. Genome Biology 11:R106.
DESeq2	DESeq2	"Love, M. I., Huber, W., & Anders, S. (2014). Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome biology, 15(12), 550."	Negative Binomial	DESeq	"It fits generalized linear models for Negative Binomial family with likelihood-ratio test for testing differential gene expression. The estimates of gene-specific dispersion parameters are obtained by shrinking (using empirical Bayes tool) the maximum-likelihood estimates toward the fitted value from modelling the observed mean-variance relationship using parametric regression model. It also applies empirical Bayes strategy to shrink of log-fold-change estimates towards 0 for low count and outlying genes. It incorporates outlier detection using Cook’s distance, and then detected genes will be removed or replace by “imputed value” (trimmed mean over all samples, scaled by the size factor, and then re-estimates the dispersion)."	Multiple	Yes	DESeq2	1.12.4	"Love, M. I., Huber, W., & Anders, S. (2014). Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome biology, 15(12), 550."
limma with Quantile Normalization	limmaQN	"Rapaport, F., Khanin, R., Liang, Y., Pirun, M., Krek, A., Zumbo, P., ... & Betel, D. (2013). Comprehensive evaluation of differential gene expression analysis methods for RNA-seq data. Genome biology, 14(9), 3158."	Log-Normal	QN	It applies quantile normalization on the logarithmic (base 2) transformed gene counts (with the addition of a constant 1 to avoid taking log of 0) and fits linear model for testing differential gene expression. The variance of the distribution is estimated by empirical Bayes strategy to share information across genes.	Multiple	No	limma	3.28.21	"Ritchie, M. E., Phipson, B., Wu, D., Hu, Y., Law, C. W., Shi, W., & Smyth, G. K. (2015). limma powers differential expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and microarray studies. Nucleic acids research, 43(7), e47-e47."
limma with Variance Stablization Transformation 	limmaVst	"Soneson, C., & Delorenzi, M. (2013). A comparison of methods for differential expression analysis of RNA-seq data. BMC bioinformatics, 14(1), 91."	Log-Normal	DESeq	First it applies variance stabilizing transformation (VST) (inherited from DESeq package) on the normalized read counts and then fits linear model for testing differential gene expression. The variance of the distribution is estimated by empirical Bayes strategy to share information across genes.	Multiple	No	limma	3.28.22	"Ritchie, M. E., Phipson, B., Wu, D., Hu, Y., Law, C. W., Shi, W., & Smyth, G. K. (2015). limma powers differential expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and microarray studies. Nucleic acids research, 43(7), e47-e47."
limma Voom	limmaVoom	"Law, C. W., Chen, Y., Shi, W., & Smyth, G. K. (2014). Voom: precision weights unlock linear model analysis tools for RNA-seq read counts. Genome biology, 15(2), R29."	Log-Normal	TMM	Normalized counts are first passed through a function called 'voom'- conversion that transforms the normalized counts to logarithmic (base 2) scale and estimates their mean–variance relationship to determine a weight to each observation prior to linear modeling. It then fits linear model for testing differential gene expression with weights are assigned to each observation. The variance of the distribution is estimated using empirical Bayes strategy to share information across genes.	Multiple	No	limma	3.28.23	"Ritchie, M. E., Phipson, B., Wu, D., Hu, Y., Law, C. W., Shi, W., & Smyth, G. K. (2015). limma powers differential expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and microarray studies. Nucleic acids research, 43(7), e47-e47."
limma Voom with Quality Weight 	limmaVoom+QW	"Liu, R., Holik, A. Z., Su, S., Jansz, N., Chen, K., Leong, H. S., ... & Ritchie, M. E. (2015). Why weight? Modelling sample and observational level variability improves power in RNA-seq analyses. Nucleic acids research, 43(15), e97-e97."	Log-Normal	TMM	It fits linear models to test DGE after down weighting the observations from more 'variable' samples after normalization.  It applies log-linear modelling (modelling heterogeneity among sample) to estimate sample variance which will be used as weights to samples (quality weights). Sample weights are then combined with observational level weights obtained from the mean–variance relationship modeling using 'voom' function prior to linear modelling. The variance of the distribution is estimated using empirical Bayes strategy to share information across genes.	Multiple	No	limma	3.28.24	"Ritchie, M. E., Phipson, B., Wu, D., Hu, Y., Law, C. W., Shi, W., & Smyth, G. K. (2015). limma powers differential expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and microarray studies. Nucleic acids research, 43(7), e47-e47."
baySeq	baySeq	"Hardcastle, T. J., & Kelly, K. A. (2010). baySeq: empirical Bayesian methods for identifying differential expression in sequence count data. BMC bioinformatics, 11(1), 422."	Negative Binomial	TMM	It calculates the posterior likelihoods of differential expression (not the usual P-values) using empirical Bayesian methods with empirical prior distribution is estimated from the data. 	Multiple	No	baySeq	2.6.0	Hardcastle TJ (2012). baySeq: Empirical Bayesian analysis of patterns of differential expression in count data. R package version 2.6.0.
PoissonSeq	PoissonSeq	"Li, J., Witten, D. M., Johnstone, I. M., & Tibshirani, R. (2012). Normalization, testing, and false discovery rate estimation for RNA-sequencing data. Biostatistics, 13(3), 523-538."	Poisson Log-Linear Model	Internal	"It estimate the sequencing depths of samples (at a normalization step) using Poisson goodness-of-fit statistic. Next, it calculates a score statistic based on a Poisson log-linear model for testing differential gene expression. It estimates the FDR (treated as adjusted p-values) using a modified version of permutation plug-in method."	Multiple	No	PoissonSeq	1.1.2	Jun Li (2012). PoissonSeq: Significance analysis of sequencing data based on a  Poisson log linear model. R package version 1.1.2. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=PoissonSeq
SAMSeq	SAMSeq	"Li, J., & Tibshirani, R. (2013). Finding consistent patterns: a nonparametric approach for identifying differential expression in RNA-Seq data. Statistical methods in medical research, 22(5), 519-536."	None	Internal	"It applies a non-parametric method based on Wilcoxon rank statistic for testing differential expression, and a resampling procedure (resampling of read fragments of genes) to account for the different sequencing depths. A permutation-based approach is used to estimate FDR (treated as adjusted p-values)."	Multiple	Yes	samr	2.0	"R. Tibshirani, G. Chu, Balasubramanian Narasimhan and Jun Li (2011). samr: SAM: Significance Analysis of Microarrays. R package version 2.0. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=samr"
QuasiSeq	QuasiSeq	"Lund, S. P., Nettleton, D., McCarthy, D. J., & Smyth, G. K. (2012). Detecting differential expression in RNA-sequence data using quasi-likelihood with shrunken dispersion estimates. Statistical applications in genetics and molecular biology, 11(5)."	Negative Binomial	TMM	"It tests differential expression using quasi-Poisson or quasi-negative binomial models with 'QL', 'QLShrink' and 'QLSpline' methods."	Multiple	No	QuasiSeq	1.0.8	"Steve Lund, Long Qu, Ian Marschner and R Core Team (2015). QuasiSeq: Analyzing RNA Sequencing Count Tables Using Quasi-Likelihood. R package version 1.0-8. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=QuasiSeq"
